Felly, iawn, roeddwn i'n mynd i chi ddweud, a allwch chi ddweud fy enw, yw'r adres a'ch datblygu, fyddwch?
Fy enw i yw Yvonne Marie Morris a roeddwn i'n cael ei ddweud yn 23 meir 1946.
Felly, os ddweud i mi ychydig am eich ymddygiad, oedd yn cael ei ddweud, eich fater, eich môr, eu cymryd, a'ch syblings?
Rydw i'n cael ei ddweud yn Antwerp, yng Nghymru, yn 1946.
Mae'n fater wedi'i cymryd yno gyda'r ymddygiad ym Mhob, yn ymchwil ym Mhob, yn ymchwil ym Mhob.
Roeddwn i'n cael ei ddweud ym Mhob, oherwydd fy fater yn oed yn ymchwil ym Mhob, yn 1955, ym mhob 56, oherwydd fy fater yn dda iawn iawn a ddweud ei fod yn mynd yn ymchwil ym Mhob.
Mae gen i un brif o'n Brian, sy'n edrych yn Barry, mae oedd yn fwy oed yn fwy oed.
Ymddygiad ymddygiad ym Mhob, a'ch ymddygiad ymddygiad ym Mhob a'ch ymddygiad ym Mhob?
Ymddygiad ym Mhob yn ddiforol oherwydd roeddwn i ddim yn ddweud unrhyw ddweud o'r Ynglwys pan ddodais i'r ymddygiad ym Mhob.
Mae tolygu'r gyd tag brushed a i lam yn nghystathroedd pryd yr Aelod hwn很多i'd!!!!!
ac yna ddim yn chof ragwغon ac fe wneud i gonellad y cyngor yn llarch Byrth.
Rwy'n dweud y gallwn chi weld branches y Deusspace Me раст 50 mân.
Ond yna dwi wedi mynd yn A Taskbarth
yn cael cymorth yn gael gwaith i gyd.
A'n mynd i gael gradd cyhoeddus cyhoeddus i'r ystafell ym Mhob i'r Unedig.
Rwy'n mynd i ddwylo ym 16.
Roeddwn i'n dechrau gweithio fel tîm hwyl.
Rwy'n credu bodwn i'n ymwneud ymlaen, yn bwysig, nid ym mlynedd.
Roeddwn i'n bwrdd, Rydgid. Roeddwn i'n hollol.
Felly roeddwn i'n gweithio'n ddwylo o weithiau, oherwydd roeddwn i ddim yn gallu gysylltu i beth.
Roeddwn i'n gweithio mewn siopau fel siopasistyn, roeddwn i'n gweithio mewn milanus, roeddwn i'n gweithio fel nannu.
Mae'n dda iawn i'r ddwy o ffamlwyr yn y Gawa, y peninsulaeth Gawa.
Ond yn y ffordd, roeddwn i'n meddwl bod yn fwyaf yn gweithio'n gweithio'n dda,
a rhywbeth sy'n cael ei gweithio'n dda yn dda, a dyna oherwydd ymlaen o weithiau fy mhob.
Felly roeddwn i'n gweithio'n dda yn Addis.
Fe fyddwch chi'n mynd i, a allwn i ddweud a ddweud sut wnaeth chi'n ei ffeirio am ddod o ddwylo,
yn y ffordd os ydych chi'n dweud eich broedd yn fwy fwy.
Mae'n dda iawn i mi yn ystod ystod hynny, oherwydd roedd hi'n ymlaen i mi.
Ond fel y byddai'n mynd yn dda, mae'n dda i mi.
Felly roeddech chi eisiau ddod o ddod o ddod o ddod?
O, mae'n dda, dwi ddim yn fwyaf am ddod o ddod.
O, roedd fy ffrindiau wedi ddod o ddod yn y ddod, ac roeddech chi'n gwybod bod ni'n gweithio'n dda ar ddod o ddod,
a'i gael gilydd a chydw i gyd ac am y pethau a'i gyd.
Roeddwn i'n gwybod bod hynny ddim yn fwyaf amdano. Roeddwn i'n gwybod pan oeddwn i'n ysgol,
roeddwn i'n fwyaf amdano. Felly roedd hynny'n bwysig o ddysgu i fy ffrindiau.
Ond roeddech chi'n gwybod bod hi'n gwybod.
A yna roeddwn i'n gweithio yn Addis.
A oherwydd nad oeddwn i ddim gael unrhyw ffrindiau ymlaen,
a dydw i ddim yn gydol â'r ffrindiau i fy ffrindiau,
ond roeddwn i'n gwybod bod y ffrindiau sydd wedi'n gweithio yn y ffattr
yn cael ffrindiau a pham mynd i.
Ar ôl iawn, dydw i ddim yn gwybod y pethau yma,
ond y ffrindiau sydd wedi'i ffôn ar y ffrindiau'r gyd
oedd yn ffrindiau sy'n cael ffrindiau i fy ffrindiau.
Mae'n anodd i'r 16 oed,
oherwydd byddai rhai o ffrindiau i'n dechrau'r gwaith a chyflen.
Mae'r ffrindiau sy'n cael ffrindiau yn cael ffrindiau yn ffrindiau,
yn cael ffrindiau yn ymlaen,
ac mae'n anodd i'r pethau yn y ffrindiau.
Felly, dydw i ddim yn gwybod hynny yn y peth,
ac weithio yno,
roedd yn dda iawn i gyd yn ffrindiau a chyflen.
Yn ogystal â hynny,
gallwch chi ddechrau i mi,
fel y dydd yma yn y ffattr,
a beth oedd oedd fel?
Beth oedd yn cael ei dda, beth oedd yn cael ei dda,
beth oedd yn dda?
O, ddod i.
Y peth a'n dda,
a'r ddŵr ymlaen,
y ddŵr yma yn y ffrindiau,
oherwydd bod yr holl ffrindiau yn mynd,
a phan o'r holl ffrindiau yn cael ei ddweud,
a oedd yn dda,
a'n dda,
roedd yn dda,
er mwyn bod llawer o llwythiau,
ac roedd yn dda,
O, ddod i beth oedd yna o'r hyn?
Rwy'n dechrau fel pakellwr,
oherwydd rydyn ni'n gweithio gyda llwythiau plasti,
ydych chi'n gwybod,
i'r holl,
mae angen i chi ddod yn ymlaen,
a rwy'n gwneud hynny yn oed,
felly mae angen i chi wneud ymlaen.
Ie, dyna sut rydw i dechrau.
Oherwydd rhai o'r mwynt yma,
peidio'n ffwrdd,
peidio'r pethau gwahanol
ymlaen. A sut ydych chi'n cael gweithio hynny?
Wel, roedd yn ddiddorol, ond rwy'n meddwl, yw'ch ddod oedd yn ffyrdd a'i ddod,
a'ch gydag chi'n gwybod â'i, e.
A oedd yn ffyrdd o'n ffyrdd neu oedd yn dda?
Yn ffyrdd, dwi ddim yn credu bod yn ffyrdd. Nid, oherwydd, yn ffyrdd,
az y byddwn hefyd usbonio'r usubauؤ'r катwysoedd naturiol i chi am dizendo'r gwasanaethze.
Gallwch d임laen, gy quantidade i εfoed y gwasanaeth,
fel hi gwelid ym podd ychwanegol hwn o beredd yn ôl music.
Brittany, oedd oedd cynnydd WYFGW pie dens i diben.
Rwy d mir mieć ni di ymd Mynducch,
a' jokec chi yn y pryd,
ac rwy am Danni gael Orffogνοi a'i Gríhiadledd.
Felly, dwi'n mynd i ddod y plen?
Roeddwn i'n ddweud, pan dweud y byddwch chi'n mynd i weithio yno,
roeddwch chi'n dweud y byddwch chi'n gwneud ffrindiau gyda phobl, ond roedd y byddwch chi'n ffrindiau yno?
A oeddwch chi'n gwybod pobl sy'n weithio yno pan dweud y byddwch chi'n weithio yno?
Nid.
Dwi ddim yn credu bod yna.
Nid, oherwydd roeddwn i'n mynd i ffrindiau i'n dda,
ond mae'r 16 oedau a oeddwn i'n gwybod yn y sgol yn dda,
yn dda, ddim yn mynd i weithio yn Addis.
Rwy'n meddwl, mae'r unrhyw unrhyw un, maen nhw'n mynd i Manic Bach,
maen nhw'n mynd i weithio yn y brifysgol,
neu maen nhw'n mynd i weithio yn y brifysgol.
Mae'n rhaid i fydd yn mynd i weithio yn y brifysgol.
Why did you choose Addis out of interest?
No particular reason, just that it was close to home.
And how did you get there?
On the bus, with all the other women.
We went through the estate and we picked everybody up,
so it was the same group of people going and coming back every day.
Were they factory buses?
No, they were public transport buses.
Did you have a test or an interview for the job?
Oh yes, I was interviewed.
Gosh, I can't remember what they asked me.
Well, I suppose they must have asked me why I didn't continue working as a short-term typist,
as I got the qualification for doing that,
and why I wanted to work in the factory.
But I don't remember what I answered.
Well, I probably told them I was bored stiff
and wanted something a bit more challenging and interesting to do.
But I had reasonably good qualifications from school and from college,
so they seemed quite keen to have me there.
I did work on the telephone switchboard there for a while as well,
answering incoming calls and connecting people.
I did train to work on the old-fashioned switchboards with the leads going in.
They were fantastic things.
So did your job change while you were at his then?
No, I did that while the telephonist was away,
or if she was off on holiday or ill or she did have maternity leave,
things like that I'd fill in.
But no, I went back onto the factory floor
and I just eventually began working on the machines,
which were quite dangerous actually.
Although they did have safety guards on them,
they were still quite dangerous things.
So I did eventually start working on the machinery
and then later on still training other people how to operate the machinery.
So just explain to me then what the machines did.
Well, what they actually did was they trimmed the brushes
because they all had to be a standard size.
And they also attached the bristles to the plastic handles.
You lined them all up on the machine
and then the bristles would be attached to the plastic handles.
And you also individually by hand sometimes
had to make sure that the bristles were of a standard size
so you actually had to run a brush through a machine which kept the bristles.
And as I recall, you did that by hand.
So that could have been extremely dangerous to do.
I don't remember us having any special gloves or even glasses,
though we must have had safety glasses.
I don't remember wearing them
because the very sharp little nylon bristles flew in all directions.
I must have had safety glasses, though I don't remember wearing them.
But some of the machines were quite large.
I was going to ask you about health and safety then.
What was health and safety like at the factory?
Well, they did all have safety guards on.
We were given good training, I have to be honest, on how to operate.
We were constantly being told to be careful
and that these machines were dangerous.
So considering it was all that time ago, I suppose it wasn't too bad, to be fair.
How long was the training?
I can't remember. It was weeks. It must have been weeks.
What about the other conditions in the factory?
The thing was, we only had a break in the morning,
a cup of tea or a cup of coffee,
and we sat down at our machines or on the line, wherever we were.
We just stopped when the hooter went
and had our 15 minutes break for a cup of coffee or whatever.
Then we carried on and we had staggered lunch breaks.
They were from 12 to half past 12, half past 12 to 1, 1 to 1 to 1.30.
Different groups went at different times.
That was half an hour.
Then in the afternoon we had a break of about three.
Again, we sat down wherever we had to be working,
had a drink and a 15 minute break again.
Was there a canteen there?
There was a canteen and the food was very good.
That's where we all went for our lunch break.
No, the food was good, I remember that.
We had a proper decent lunch.
What about the building itself? Was it hot, cold?
It was extremely hot because all the roofs were glass.
The sun just absolutely hammered down when the sun was shining.
It was really hot to work underneath the light.
Those were the only windows. There were no windows in the building.
The sun would come in through the roof.
It was extremely hot in the summer and extremely cold in the winter.
I can remember many occasions where we worked in our coats,
without coats and scarves on.
I was going to ask you about the union, but before I go on there,
you mentioned about time and motion people as well.
Could you tell me about that?
We regularly had time and motion people coming in and watching us,
observing us to see how fast we were working or how slow we were working
or how many an hour would be a reasonable number to do.
It was almost always more than we thought we could manage.
We had to speed up.
Those people were dreaded.
They knew every time they came that they would probably push the numbers up
that were required.
They never went down, they always went up.
We never looked forward to that at all.
We thought, oh God, here we go again, they want more.
To increase profits, obviously.
We got less and they always increased profits,
which I suppose at the end of the day is what they're there for.
We always got less in our pay packets than they got in theirs.
We always felt that anyway.
There was some I can't remember how it worked mathematically now,
but we were always on the losing end of it anyway.
But then if they don't make a profit, we don't have jobs
and the factory doesn't continue to operate.
So something you got used to really.
What about the union then? Was there a union?
The first thing I did was join a union.
Do you remember which union it was?
Transport and General Work as it was then.
Yeah, it's the first thing we did really.
We had regular union meetings.
On the whole, we didn't have a lot of problems to be honest with them as employees
because the pay rate was reasonable.
But it was the conditions that really bothered us.
Oh God, I knew she'd do this.
Okay, you were talking about the union.
I'll ask you then, were there any disputes?
The only ones I can remember were in the winter
when we had to work in our coats and we were so cold.
I remember there being a dispute about that.
The heating was never sufficient.
It just never seemed to penetrate.
The building was so huge.
We were never aware of any great heat.
We all complained about it and nothing appeared to be done.
I suppose they would have had to do quite a big job in putting decent heating in
and they were reluctant to do it.
So we did all decide to go out, to walk out.
We did have a strike.
I can remember us all walking out en masse
and us being in the local paper, which was Evening Post.
It's still going in Swansea.
Also being on the local news, on the BBC, on the local Welsh news, if you don't behave.
Were most of you members of the union?
Yes.
Did you become an official or anything?
No, I wasn't an official.
No, I wasn't there long enough and I was so young.
Obviously I was one of the youngest ones there really,
so it would have been a much older person than me.
Can you describe to me, you were talking about the brushes,
but can you describe to me what was made in the factory altogether?
Things like dish racks, cutlery trays, sink tidies,
scrubbing brushes, sweeping brooms, mops,
anything that you can think of that you could use in a home or in the kitchen specifically,
anything that was made of plastic.
It was made there.
Yeah, that was it really.
Anything else? Sweeping...
Sink tidies, everything like that really.
So, did you enjoy working at the factory?
It's a difficult question to answer that really.
Some aspect of it I enjoyed.
But as time went on, I became quite frustrated
and felt that there was something more I could be doing.
If you know what I mean.
I wasn't being stretched.
What about the workforce? Was it mainly women?
Yes.
How many people were there?
Must have been hundreds.
I don't remember there being any male employees.
Apart from, strangely enough, the bosses who were all male.
The supervisors were female and all the workers were female.
It was a huge building, so I have no idea how many actually...
Oh, for goodness sake!
I was a bit worried about the work.
I was worried about the work.
For goodness sake!
So, mainly women then?
Well, mainly all women except for the bosses.
Except for the bosses.
Were there what you considered unskilled and skilled jobs?
Oh, now I think about it.
There was a workshop where they repaired...
They did all the repairs and that was all male.
But you know, in all the years I was there,
I never walked into it, I never went there.
But I did speak to some of the men who worked there.
That would be considered skilled work.
Because they were the men that fixed the machines when they broke down.
And anything that was broken, they would fix it.
So that was considered skilled.
Working on the machines was skilled.
Because, you know, obviously it took a lot more skill to operate a machine
than it did to pack an item.
Yeah, so that would be considered more skilled.
Were you paid more to work on the machine than you?
Yes.
Well, your rate increased just the longer you were there anyway.
You got increments, you know.
They paid you for loyalty basically, the longer you stayed.
Your pay went up incrementally anyway if you stayed.
Because so many people left, obviously, when they had children and stuff.
And then came back when their children were grown up quite often.
So there was a big gap.
No, the pay increased.
It increased with time spent.
And obviously there were things like if you were promoted to a supervisory position,
your rates obviously went up.
I'd like to ask you actually, because you did all these other things first.
How old were you when you went to work there?
And what year was it?
I think it was 1963.
So you were 19?
No, I was born in 1946.
Oh, sorry, 17.
Yeah.
I think it was either 16 or 17.
I think it was, I left school at 16.
And none of my jobs lasted more than a few weeks before I went to Addis.
I wasn't yet 17 before I went there, don't I?
Great, OK.
Sorry.
So were there married women working in the factory?
Oh yes, lots of them.
Yeah, and there was no problem with that?
No.
And what about when you said when they had children they came back?
Were there any child caring facilities in the factory?
Oh no.
Oh good Lord, not in 1963.
It didn't even enter their thinking.
No way.
No.
There were women with young children who were working there.
How they coped, I don't know, because they didn't even leave at three to pick up their children from school.
So it must have been their mothers who did that, or members of the family.
Because they had to finish at four, four thirty, and that was long after the kids had come home from school.
Yeah.
Oh no, that wouldn't have even occurred to them in those days.
You weren't encouraged to have time off, even if your child was ill, you know, that was tough really.
You had to come in to work, whatever.
They kept a very, very keen eye on the number of days you took off sick.
A lot of us used to have very painful periods.
I was one of those, I was usually in agony.
And standing when you had an extremely painful period was not funny.
And I quite often used to end up in the sick room.
We had a sick room.
And a nurse who worked there and who would give you pills if the pain got too bad.
Or you were even allowed to lie down for a bit if the pain got too bad.
And then when the pain wore off, you had to go back on your machine.
There was no question of you going home.
Because obviously their argument was that they would be sending you all home.
Because in all our periods, possibly at the same time, you'd all be going off.
And the factory would come to a complete stop.
So tough you had to get on with it really.
So yeah, they were very tight on sick time.
Any kind of sick time.
The person with the least sick time was always praised very highly.
And that was easy for me because I had no family.
I had nothing to worry about except myself.
So I never took sick time.
It's a different issue if you've got children.
It's not that you're idle.
It's that you've got other priorities and commitments you have to see to.
So yeah, I was always, well done Yvonne, you haven't taken any sick time this year.
And I thought, well, fine.
I've only got myself to bother about really.
If you did take sick time, was there sick pain?
Yes.
Do you remember how much that was?
No, it was too long ago.
It was too long ago now.
Can we go on to wages anyway?
Can you remember how much you were paid a week at the beginning?
I know when I was working that year before I started in Addis as a shorthand typist, I think it was,
I was earning about £3.15 a week in those days.
It must have been in that area.
It certainly wasn't less because I was happy with the money that I got.
You know, being a single person, I mean, it was a reasonable amount of money.
Are you still living at home then?
Oh yes.
Did you give your mum?
I gave my mum some money, yeah.
She didn't ask for a lot to be fair.
Yes, no, I didn't leave home until I was in my twenties.
So what did you do with the rest of the money? Do you remember?
Just enjoyed it really. Spent it.
Went shop.
Do you remember?
Well, I like going to the cinema, so I used to go a lot.
And the usual stuff, I suppose, buy clothes, records, particularly because I loved music.
Bought loads of records, went into town with my friends and just enjoyed spending it really.
You know, you say they played music in the factory.
Do you remember whether it was on the radio or did people just take records?
It was on the radio. The radio was always on. Nonstop really.
Do you remember which station that was?
No, probably Radio 2.
The light service.
The light service. The light programme as it was called then.
The light programme, yeah.
Yes, popular music.
Pre-radio.
Pre-radio too. Yes, yeah, popular music. Music non-stop really.
So you don't remember any pay rises or anything like that?
Do you remember how much it was when you left, for example?
No, but it was higher than when I started.
I know it went up.
That's all I was concerned about. It went up rather than down.
No, I can't remember now. That's too long ago really.
Did you have to wear any kind of uniform?
No, we all wore overalls. Not overalls. Yes, overalls.
Not overalls. What do they call them?
Well, I suppose it was a kind of overall.
No, we always brought our own in.
We bought them ourselves.
What we chose, what we wanted to do was to have a uniform.
What we wore, we bought ourselves. It wasn't provided for us.
Right, okay. So you could buy any kind of...?
Well, we bought our own stuff in order to obviously take care of our own clothing,
so that wasn't damaged in any way or made dirty or whatever.
Was that an issue that they didn't pay for your protective clothing?
I think people did complain about it, yes.
I think some people felt that they should be provided.
Do you remember any injuries that people had during...?
You said that some of the machines were quite dangerous.
Yes, I do remember them being minor though.
They weren't anything major, like nobody lost a limb or anything,
or a finger or a hand or anything like that.
There were some minor cuts and minor injuries, but nothing major.
You said it was quite noisy. Did you have any hearing...?
I remember some people having it.
If the machines were particularly noisy, but the rest of us no.
Even though we were in the same area as the machines,
when you were packing, the machines were kind of all around you
and the noise level was just as high really, but we didn't have any.
But then you see, we weren't keen on wearing them anyway
because we were talking to each other all the time.
We kept you sane talking to other people and having a laugh,
and you couldn't have heard them, so we wouldn't have worn them.
Well, we would have worn them reluctantly.
Like we knew many other women in the past, lip read as a way of communicating with each other,
and that's probably what we would have done.
We would have learned to lip read.
The noisiest machines you were told to wear your earmuffs to protect yourself.
Do you feel that you suffered any long-term health issues from your work there?
No.
Were you allowed to smoke?
Oh, that was a massive issue.
We weren't allowed to smoke on the factory floor,
and everybody wanted to smoke during their break,
and because we were on the factory floor it wasn't allowed, and it was a massive issue.
We all felt that we should be able to go to a room, not me, I've never smoked in my entire life,
but all my colleagues felt that they should be allowed to go to a specific room
that was set aside downstairs for people who smoked,
or even a specific room where we could take our sandwiches or a snack,
or to take our coffee breaks rather than sit on the factory floor,
so everybody would go to the toilets as often as they could get away with,
and have a quick fag in there.
But quite often the supervisors would follow you in and double-check you weren't smoking,
and you had to go into the actual loo itself and lock the door,
but they could always smell it and see the smoke rising and whatever,
and they used to tell you to put it out,
it was a bit like a regime where people watched you and followed you in there.
What about going to the toilet, did you have to have permission?
Yes, particularly if you were on, well no, in either event,
whether you were on a machine or on a line packing,
you always had to say, I'm clocking off, going to the loo,
and then I'm back kind of thing now,
because of course you had to make up that time to make sure that that number of hours,
the number of packages or the number of brushes you had to do that hour were caught up with,
so whatever time you spent in the loo, you had to make it up when you came back
and make sure within that hour you got that number back,
so you were going like the clappers when you got back to your station to make sure you didn't lose out.
So did you have to clock in in the morning then?
Yes.
And clock out when you went into the toilet?
Clock out for you?
No, we didn't clock out, we didn't use the clock,
but we had to say, is it okay if I go to the loo,
and I'm going now kind of thing.
So did you just clock out in the evening?
Yes, morning and evening, clock in and clock out when you left.
So who timed your breaks then?
Well there were always supervisors on the floor, quite often they used to sit with you in groups,
and they'd look at their watches and say, right, 50 minutes is up now guys, back to work.
I mean it was just a strict for them in a sense, because they couldn't go anywhere either really,
except that they did have their own office.
So they could have their sandwiches in there and have a drink in there any time they wanted really.
Did you get on with the supervisors?
They varied, they varied.
I mean obviously they vary as individuals, some are much nicer than others, you know,
so some were quite reasonable human beings and others were not.
Some we felt were more sort of sympathetic and empathetic with the workforce,
and others were definitely not.
They were very much, you know, the bosses.
And they kind of watched us.
I remember we had one from Scotland who was absolutely terrifying.
Everybody was scared of her, she was so strict.
And then we had another one, a local girl, who was absolutely lovely.
And she came to the loose with everybody and had to fag herself,
which probably could have got her sacked.
So you had that huge spectrum, you had some that were really nice and others not so nice.
Why did the supervisors come from, what I mean is, did they come from the factory floor,
or were they given jobs?
Both, some could be promoted from the factory floor,
and some came in as supervisors having worked elsewhere.
It varied really.
Come to think of it, I don't remember many promotions within the factory.
Even the women who had been there many, many years that I was friendly with,
unless they didn't actually apply for supervisory positions, maybe that was it.
Maybe they didn't want them.
But no, I tended to be women who came in as supervisors.
But nearly all of them had factory experience, they'd worked on factory floors.
How were you, the workers, viewed by other people in Swansea?
Was it a perfectly good job?
Yes.
I was very happy.
How were you, the workers, viewed by other people in Swansea?
Was it a perfectly good job?
Yes.
We weren't looked down on in any way.
Oh no, I never felt that.
No, not by anybody.
No.
So how many days did you work a week?
Five days, Monday to Friday.
No.
I never did any overtime at weekends.
I remember not being pressured into doing weekend work.
Nobody ever pressured me into doing weekend work.
But there was weekend work.
I mean there must have been because the factory was open seven days a week.
So there must have been.
And how many hours a day?
7.30am to 4.30am or 8am to 4.30am.
Something like that.
So quite long days then, especially with no breaks in different places.
Were there shifts then?
Were you aware of people doing shifts?
Yes, I didn't do them though.
I only worked those hours.
Do you think that was because you were younger or you didn't want to,
I'm sorry, I don't mean to lead you, but you weren't even asked, were you?
Nobody ever asked me, no.
No.
No, I'm pretty sure, as far as I can remember it, we all left at the same time.
We all finished at the same time because there was a mass exodus.
So I'm not sure what happened after that, what happened in the evening.
Because I remember, I mean there was a mass of women all going at the same time.
So we must have all vacated the factory together.
What about holidays with pay, holiday allowance?
Do you remember anything about that?
I can't remember what the holiday allowance was.
I mean we had paid holidays, probably only a fortnight a year or something.
Do you remember if you could pick your holidays or was it this minus holiday thing?
No.
Did the factory close down or did people take different holidays?
No, people took different holidays.
No, the factory didn't close down.
We all had stacket holidays.
Obviously you had to put in your request for a holiday in advance.
Yes.
And what about bank holidays?
Yes, we had bank holidays off.
And was the factory shut down?
No idea.
I can't remember whether it was shut or not.
Okay.
Where did you go on holiday?
Well, because as I said I was born in Belgium, we always went back to Belgium.
My mother's family were all still there, her sister and her mother.
So we always spent our fortnight going back to Belgium to see my mother's family.
So it was pretty much the same every year for us really.
So you didn't take any independent?
Not until I was much older and my grandmother in Belgium and my aunt.
Well, my grandmother eventually passed away obviously.
But we still continued to go after that.
I've got a photograph of myself there when I was 18.
I was in Belgium then on holiday.
And we carried right on going until I was quite old.
Over 20, we were still going every year.
Right.
Good.
You mentioned the sickness days alone.
Were you allowed days for personal reasons?
Funerals, maybe it didn't happen to you, but were you aware of difficulty if people needed to go to a funeral or any other kind of personal reason?
No, I think you were asked permission to go to a funeral, but I don't remember ever being refused.
Right.
Okay.
Okay then, so down to the social life.
Were there any social activities organised by the workers?
Well, I mean in the sense that if anybody had a birthday or a special event, we all sort of celebrated it together.
And Christmas time, we all had a works do as they used to call it, where we all went to a club together and had a Christmas party and Christmas meal and stuff.
Where did you go? Do you remember?
Yeah, I can't remember what it was called now, but it's still there because I passed it a few, when I went recently.
Something like the, not the Star Inn, no that was the other end of Glansamle.
It's still there as you go into Swansea, on the right hand side as you're driving into Swansea.
So was it down near town?
Very near town.
Was it near the factory?
It was only a few minutes drive from the factory or a few minutes on the bus from the factory. It was very local.
Right. Explain to me where the factory was because you explained to me on the phone.
Well, it's in Pentrichwyth because it was right next to the river, but you actually go through Boli Mine.
That's where you get off the bus and then you walk down a very, very steep hill because it was right alongside the river.
So it was really in Boli Mine, I would say.
Okay, is it still there?
Well, I'm obviously not operating anymore, but I'm told the buildings are still there.
Right, okay.
So a Christmas dance, can you remember any special Christmas dance or were they all the same? Were they good?
No, I mean we just had, yeah, everybody got drunk basically. We had a nice meal, everybody got drunk, we went to this club.
It's a pub restaurant it was, kind of. Wish I could remember what it was called because it would come to me.
If you're driving into Swansea from Cardiff, just before you get to what is now, is it Sainsbury's on the left?
Just before, there's a set of traffic lights and if you look to your right, that place still exists that we used to go to.
There's a kind of pub club there on the right hand side before you go through those traffic lights past Sainsbury's and so on and go further down.
That club is still there. So I'm not sure what area of Swansea that would be, whether it would be Port Tennant or if it's too far towards Swansea to be Port Tennant.
But it's still there anyway.
I know what you mean.
So did you go there for the birthday parties as well? Was it always the same place?
Yeah, we tended to go to the same place, yes. Or sometimes we'd go to pubs, you know, obviously pubs in Swansea.
What about trips? Did you go on trips?
Don't remember any trips at all, none at all, no.
So you said you were friendly with the older women and the factory. Was there a good camaraderie?
Yes. Yes, we were all very tight. Oh yes, we were always aware of one another's private lives and personal issues that were going on with people's marriages and relationships and stuff. Oh yeah.
And did you remain friends with them after you left?
After I left the factory?
Yes.
Oh yes, we all remained on good terms, but obviously, you know, eventually I left Swansea completely, so I didn't see them anymore.
No, no, no. The thing is, if you start another job and they're still working there, you're not going to come across one another very much.
It's just, you know, you're deliberately avoiding one another, but unless you live very close to each other.
I had one or two close friends, though, I continued to keep in touch with.
Even now?
Oh no, not since I left Swansea. No.
I mean, there'll all be a lot of them being a better place now, won't they? I mean, they were twenty odd years older than I was, so they'll be long gone, really.
So how long were you with the factory for?
I don't know exactly how long I was there, because I left to work. I know I went from there to a milliner's to work, where I actually delivered millinery to all the major stores in Swansea, and I was there for quite a while.
And I also can't even remember chronologically in which order it went.
And subsequently I went back to Addis a second time.
Now that wasn't until much later, because I actually left to join the army.
And I went and did my basic training. I was only in the army a few months, because just before I went into the army, I'd met Margaret.
And I decided to buy myself out of the army in order to continue, well, not continue, begin a relationship.
So I bought myself out.
And I went back there for a while to work.
And I left, when I left there, I left Swansea and went to live in Bridgend.
To live with Margaret, because she lived on her own in Bungalow.
But that took quite a long time.
I can remember going back and forth for something like 16 months between Addis, leaving Addis on a Friday, going to Bridgend for the weekend and going back to Addis on a Monday morning.
So I must have been there a fair while, because we met in February of 72.
No, we didn't.
We met in 1970, in November of 1970.
And I didn't move into Bridgend until February of 72.
So that period of time, again, I was working in Addis.
Right.
So why do you think you went back there?
Was it, I mean, did you feel, did you feel happy there?
No, it's just a question of the familiar really.
I knew exactly what I was going back to.
And I thought rather, because I had it in the back of my mind that wherever I went I wouldn't be there very long.
I just thought, well, I go back to what I know.
The money's okay.
I know I can do the job.
I'll stick it out there for a little while and see how things turn out.
Why did you leave in the first place then?
I can't remember.
I just thought probably I wanted to change.
It was just, you know, familiar routine.
I just wanted to change really and do something different.
And did you enjoy these different things, like the milling as, as much as you enjoyed the factory?
No.
No, because I was working with them, two initially, and two women initially, and then one of them left to have a baby, and I was working with one other woman.
And it was kind of lonely in a sense after working with that huge crowd of people in a factory.
It was lonely in that sense.
I had a female boss who was very kind to me.
But, and I've spent most of my time outside.
So that's part of the reason I left, I think, was because I was beginning to feel claustrophobic and enclosed really.
Being indoors for those number of hours every day, every week.
You're never seeing the outside.
Never, you know.
I got a job where I spent a lot of my time outside because I was delivering millinery, so I was outside a great deal.
Walking round Swansea really, different parts, and seeing different people when I was going to the stores to hand over the millinery.
I thought that would, you know, that would be great.
I worked in Wine Street.
The millinery was in Wine Street, and it was a really interesting area.
It was a red light district in those days.
Not posh like it is now, full of restaurants and clubs and bars.
It was very interesting working there.
But, as I say, it was lonely after working with, I was working with one other person who wasn't exactly a joy to work with, looking back on it now.
So, yeah.
No, I did regret it actually.
Yeah.
What about joining the Army?
Why did you feel you wanted to join the Army?
God alone knows, Catherine.
God alone knows.
What I was thinking at the time, I have no idea.
Lots of my friends left.
Two of my friends went to join the Army that I was in school with, and they said it was a very interesting, exciting life, and you know, why, what you do, why are you wasting your life doing those crap jobs?
Why don't you join the Army?
It's fun.
You'll have a great time, you know.
So, I think I was partly influenced by them.
One of the friends I was very close to in school, I continued to have a friendship with after she joined the Army.
Two of my closest friends joined the Army.
I think I was influenced by them, and my father had been in the Army as well.
Not that he recommended it, because he hated the Army, but I think it was the two women who said to me, you know, it's much more interesting than working in a factory or a shop or whatever.
You know, there's so much going on, it's so interesting, you really enjoy it.
Yeah.
So off I went.
Okay.
So, can I just ask you, you said you'd started a relationship with your partner, Margaret, in early 70s, and you went back to the factory.
Were you open about your sexuality, and if you were, or if you weren't, if you know what I mean, how were people's attitudes in the factory?
Well, I knew I was gay when I was in school, and people, you know, generally said everybody went through this phase where they had crushes on other girls, and they grew out of them.
And I thought, fine, that'll happen to me as well, but it didn't.
I had boyfriends, a number of boyfriends at the same time as it happened, but most of my friends had sex at quite an early age, you know, when they were still in their mid-teens and had babies subsequently, and I wouldn't have sex with boys.
I always refused.
And I had a bit of a reputation as being frigid.
I was told I was frigid, and, you know, I wasn't coming across, so I was frigid, there was something wrong with me, but I knew it was because I was gay.
I just, I slowly came to realise that I was gay anyway, right through my teens.
And when I was, I mean, as far as the women were concerned, that was something they almost spat out, as though it was something disgusting and dirty.
I mean, if you told them that you were gay, I suspect not many of them would have spoken to me or got anywhere close to me in case, you know, it rubbed off on them by reputation.
It was a very different atmosphere in the 1960s.
Things were slowly beginning to change, but really it wasn't until the 70s that the major changes began, and attitudes began to change.
No, I never discussed it with anyone.
Even when you'd started a relationship?
Well, I had a relationship before Margaret when I was, I must have been around 20, I suppose.
I met somebody who was a lot older than I was, and who was bisexual.
And she was much older, much more sophisticated, when she was 31, and I was, you know, I was green really, I was very young and naïve in many ways.
She'd got a degree at Sheffield University. She was highly intelligent.
And she was the first person, whoever, showed me any true respect that I didn't get any at home.
Because my brother was considered to be highly intelligent, which he was and still is, and I was considered, you know, to be average.
And letting the family down because I wasn't going out with boys and I wasn't getting engaged and I wasn't getting married and I wasn't having babies.
But she was the first person to ask me for my opinion on anything.
If we discussed things, you know, general things that were going on in the world and in society around us, social events and political events and stuff, and she would actually say, what do you think?
I remember being absolutely gobsmacked the first time she said that to me.
What do you think about it? Have you thought about that? What's your opinion on it?
And I thought, my God, nobody has ever asked me for my opinion. Nobody.
So I was silent for a long time and I thought, I did think about things, but I never discussed them with anyone.
Because I was never asked. So she was the first relationship I had.
And that was going on when I was still working in the factory. So I was going to work and she was then working as a civil servant.
There was no way I could have discussed that with anybody.
And I mean, we broke up because she actually had a relationship with a married man while she was seeing me at the same time.
And I decided enough was enough really. And I basically packed it in because she became pregnant by him.
It's a long, complicated story.
He paid for an abortion and I was the one who went to the hospital with her, but we won't go there.
I decided that was enough. Finished.
But there was no way I could have discussed that with anybody. I never discussed it with anyone.
I didn't have a single friend that I could discuss that with.
So definitely not with anybody in the factory?
No.
OK. OK.
Looking back now, this is the last question.
Oh.
I just asked. You didn't go and work in any other factory after that, did you?
No.
So looking back now, how do you feel?
I tell a lie. I did. But that was after I moved in with Margaret. So that was in Bridgend.
And what factory was that?
Miles Laboratories, it was called.
If you can think of any household medication, any sort of familiar brand name that you can think of, they bottled.
So it was a line, it was machinery and it was a series of bottles that you had to fill.
How did that compare with Addis?
There was a lot less camaraderie there. A lot more focus on the work.
And no chatting. Because the machines were a lot faster and you had to keep up with them.
You didn't have time to chat to people. Except of course during your breaks.
I mean the conditions were much better. Extremely clean, extremely hygienic, much better facilities.
Decent breaks, good money, blah blah blah.
But the camaraderie was virtually, I mean except during lunch breaks when you had an opportunity to chat.
It was totally focused on the work really.
And was that a smaller factory?
No, it was quite large.
Was that mainly women?
Yes.
And what years, do you remember?
Well I moved in in 1972, so it must have been between 1972 and 1974 I worked there.
Right. And do you remember any social occasions, that kind of thing?
Yes, it was a lot more sophisticated. We all went into Cardiff.
A different world really.
And sorry, what was it called?
Miles Laboratories. I've got a feeling it's probably still there.
Enbridge End Industrial Estate, it's probably still there.
And the conditions were good, so you were, do you remember how much you earned?
No, no idea.
But you were happy with the wage?
Yes, the money was fine.
Looking back then, how do you feel about the time you spent working in these factories?
Well it was very formative in a way. I didn't realise it at the time.
But it helped me get through some very difficult years at home.
And I formed some very close relationships really.
Which helped me through difficult times really.
Generally, how do you think, generally for women, were they important places?
Everybody there felt that. It gave them a sense of independence and also a sense of who they were as individuals.
Because most of them were married with families and everybody related to them in that way.
They were somebody's wife and somebody's mother.
But while they were in the factories, they were themselves.
And they got back in touch with their identity and who they were.
And they formed close relationships with other women.
And I think they were able to be themselves in a way that they probably weren't at home.
It taught you a lot of things about yourself.
Forming relationships, being able to work as a member of a team.
Things like loyalty.
And I also learned to be discreet because a lot of people told you personal stuff.
Which they trusted you with.
Not necessarily anyone else.
Maybe things they couldn't talk about even to members of their family.
What about Addis? Do you think they were good employers on the home?
For the time they were.
Considering it was the early 60s.
What was the factory called by the way?
Addis. Addis Limited, yeah.
And what about the other place in Bridgend Mills?
Yes, they were probably reasonable employers as well.
They followed all the rules.
They had no complaints about working conditions.
But you were expected to pull your finger out and work hard really.
Nothing major to complain about.
Thank you very much Yvonne.
You're welcome, that's okay.
I forgot to ask you this Yvonne.
Were there any perks from working in the factory?
Yes, you did get everything at a reduced cost.
But every night when you left the factory you were at randomly searched by security.
To make sure you didn't have anything on your person that you shouldn't have had.
So you had to go through a gate.
And at random they just picked you out.
Went through your handbag, went through your shopping bag.
Quite often used to frisk you to make sure you didn't have anything on your body that you shouldn't have had.
So were any people caught?
Yes.
What happened to them?
They were sucked.
Oh yes.
I don't think you had the opportunity to do it a second time.
No.
Okay.
Thank you very much.
That's okay.